---
---

## Comptia Certified!

I have several years of experience in IT, and finally I have a proper certification to prove I have some vague idea of what I'm doing. I've studied for the A+ like 3 times, and it's either timed out or I ran out of money. I was studying again for the 220-1001 and 220-1002, the tests for which were set to expire 2022-10-20, and I wasn't going to let it time out on me again. I was either going to take it and pass, or take it and fail, but I wasn't going to let it slip me by again!

I succeeded! I got some 95% and 90% on the two exams this week, and received the badge and certification today.

<div data-iframe-width="150" data-iframe-height="270" data-share-badge-id="2eacb880-eb5a-438a-b69f-d9e546a4cd3b" data-share-badge-host="https://www.credly.com"></div><script type="text/javascript" async src="//cdn.credly.com/assets/utilities/embed.js"></script>

### other projects

With that under my belt, I feel less guilty about returning to other projects.
Project pace slowed down a lot for a couple reasons: I could feel the deadline
for the A+ looming, and I wanted to keep studying for that and not let it pass
me by. The other is that I had been waylaid by a project to reformat my resume,
which I was feeling pressure about since I kept getting rejections from
applications, and the resume was the only thing that stood out as a problem to
me. Reformatting the resume ultimately also got paused for the A+ study, and
became less of a concern since I received a job offer, as previously mentioned.

I want to put a tidy bow on the resume before I return to the local Jenkins
CI/CD -> GitHub Pages project.
