---
---

#Interviews after-action review

## 2022-10-11 interview with Platform Engineering team

I think this went well, since a couple hours later I got a job offer! This was
a followup to the powershell technical interview from [2022-09-27](2022-09-27).
I had initially been turned down since the other finalist candidate had
significantly more experience with powershell, and was, quote, "a powershell
wizard". But they had another position on the same team open up, and one of the
technical leads thought of me for the role.

We discussed my responsibilities in my previous role, the way in which I used
Ansible, what kind of scripts I have written, etc. We also discussed what kind
of things I wanted from my next position. Oh, gosh, I was so nervous! I was
really excited about this role, and didn't want to screw up. I said as much,
and I don't regret that. I gave answers with confidence and I was personable, I
just was unclear on the exact nature of the interview going into it.

I fielded a couple specific philosophical/technical questions:

Q: "How would you handle updating images?"

A: Well, that depends on the situation. If we're talking about OCI compliant
containers, such as for Podman/docker, etc, then it'd probably be sufficient to
make sure the container build files include instructions for pulling updates,
like if it's build on ubuntu or alpine, just include ``RUN apt-get update...``
etc, and then rebuild that container spec in the appropriate context on a
weekly or whatever basis. Keep the artifacts under version control, tag them
appropriately, run regression tests to make sure nothing breaks.

Alternatively, if they're VM images, it'd be best to use a similar automation
process. Packer is the tool for that, since it's better to have a known-good
image configured rather than deploying and running some playbooks against it,
hoping that it works appropriately. It's better to know at build-time if a
resource has changed or is not available for any reason, such as a service
outage or updated tags. Similarly, this can be looped into a CI/CD process as
part of the build stage.

Q: "Would you use Ansible on a Windows Server"

A: Well, that depends... Ansible has a dependency on Python and SSH [^1], so
that adds to the maintenance overhead for those servers, and the Ansible
Windows modules are kind of limited. For new clients where you can set up SSH
keys and etc at build or deploy time, that's a no-brainer, but for existing
clients with an existing program delivery structure or MDM, it may be easier to
go with something that has an agent, like Puppet or Salt. The main issue I see
is the overhead of managing Python and SSH keys [^1].

[^1]: This is incorrect, actually! I thought it was so at the time of the
interview, but this is only true of Linux hosts. See
[redhat][rh_ansible_for_windows],
[ansible docs][ansible_docs_windows_setup],
and [powershell docs][ms_pwsh_winrm_security].

[rh_ansible_for_windows]: https://www.ansible.com/for/windows
[ansible_docs_windows_setup]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/windows_setup.html#host-requirements
[ms_pwsh_winrm_security]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/learn/remoting/winrmsecurity?view=powershell-7.2

## 2022-10-10 interview with MSP

This was a weird one. The winning bet with an MSP is that they'll be able to
charge more for their services than they pay to techs and engineers, with a
large number of clients keeping them on retainer. This one has a structure
where, if an employee is tackling an average of so many billable hours a week,
additional hours are paid extra. I won't say that this incentivizes taking your
time any more than any other hourly pay structure, but it does reward digging
into tough problems and staying late on a project when incidents come up.

Culturally, I am perfectly capable of sliding into that structure. I'd do fine,
I'm sure. But I was a little thrown off by a couple of things.

1. The interviewer assessed that I'd be at the junior end of their team. I've
   been a junior syseng, where I'm just taking orders from senior engineers and
   I bear no responsibility for any systems. That's not where I am by now. I'm
   at a point in my career where I'm comfortable seeking out ways to improve
   infrastructure or processes, implement them start to finish, and teach
   someone else how to maintain them. By *every* metric I can find, including
   [USENIX's definitions][usenix_core_job_descriptions] on the subject, I have
   the skills of an upper mid-level SysAdmin/SysEng. Solving Active Directory
   issues quickly is a matter of expertise with a specific tool, not a matter
   of overall systemic thinking or OS knowledge. I was kinda salty about that,
   no lie.
2. In a technical whatif about changing the IP on the DC/DNS server, the
   interviewer did not communicate his expectations, which included a base
   assumption that all servers on the network had statically configured IPs
   (why?). The answer I gave included a decent breakdown of DNS TTL, DHCP
   reservations, the DNS recursion to make sure that if you have DNS
   replication (you should) that if DNS-2 is referencing itself before it
   references DNS-1, that you spoil or update those records lickety split. The
   answer he was looking for was "don't do that".
	- DHCP reservations are, in my honest opinion, what you *should* be
	  using for most servers in current year. There are two kinds of
	  people: those who use DHCP for their servers, and those who haven't
	  had to migrate a bunch of servers manually. And like, if you're
	  worried about availability or bootstrapping or whatever, rasbpis are
	  cheap and perfectly capable of boostrapping in case of recovery.
	- Even if you're doing something statically, there's no excuse not to
	  use an IPAM and some provisioning tool like Ansible or Terraform to
	  deal with slurping up data from the IPAM and applying changes to
	  servers. You can use that to manage DHCP reservations, too!
   
   Ultimately, this just represented what I'd consider very different
   philosophical approaches to managing systems at scale. Let the computer do
   the work for you.

[usenix_core_job_descriptions]: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/lisa/books/usenix_22_jobs3rd_core.pdf
