---
---

# Technical interview after-action review

The technical subject of the interview was on Powershell, as a followup to the
previous screening technical interview. The specific task was to change a
property in an XML file. Unfortunately, all the preparation I had been doing
over the weekend, and yesterday, was on broader concept powershell scripting.
Language flow, objects, how to retrieve member information, etc, and not on
specific functions within powershell, or the environment. So what I was
expecting was some little coding challenge that wanted to demonstrate my
critical thinking and ability to reason through an algorithm, maybe pass some
objects around, and I was very unprepared. But, I was prepared enough to muddle
my way through the problem, and apparently most candidates do not make it
through the challenge, so...

Ultimately I won't be surprised if I get beat out by another candidate who has
more experience.

Mistakes I made:

- In googling, the first article of relevance I found offered a correct
  solution, but I was breezing past the actual
  [information][ms_devblog_powershell_xml], so when I tried to implement the
  idea, I did it wrongly.
	1. The rest may have worked, except I neglected to create a new object
	   of type ``[xml]`` correctly. This could have been accomplished by
	   either of:
		- ``$xml_doc = New-Object XML; $xml_doc.load("$absolute_path")``
		- ``[xml]$xml_doc = Get-Content("$filepath")``
	   What I did instead was:
	   
	   ```powershell
	   $not_actually_xml_doc = Get-Content("$xml_filepath")
	   $not_actually_xml_doc.childNodes #This produced nothing useful
	   $not_actually_xml_doc.getType() #why is it a generic custom object?!
	   ```
	   
	   The difference is that just slurping up the content of the xml file was
	   not sufficient to make the variable observe the xml object type in
	   powershell, and the object type is where the methods and power live.
	   What I needed to do, like either of the first examples, was create an
	   object specifically of the ``[xml]`` type.
	   
	2. The first go around, I tried to ``$untyped_var=load("$absolute_path")``.
	   This did not work, not the least of which is because what I wanted was,
	   per the earlier line, to use the ``load()`` method of an object of the
	   XML class.  Now, in fairness, I think the reference that I
	   [used][ms_devblog_powershell_xml] had a typo, which threw me way, way
	   off.
- I was unclear on how to understand the methods on an object of a given type.
  From what I can tell, most such objects are instances of .Net core classes.
  Their API is defined and [documentation][ms_docs_dotnet_api_core3] available
  online, but not easily rendered or retrieved from powershell, which is vexing.
		- Of relevant concern, the System.Xml types, and their methods, can be
		  found [here][ms_docs_system_xml_api]
- I just generally let nervousness get to me and I jumped the gun on some
  commands without really understanding their structure or purpose.
  Import-Clixml, for instance, does not do what I thought it did. I can't even
  really recall what I thought it did, but I was hoping that it would let me
  pull in an xml file an get an object that was nicely understood as such.

[ms_devblog_powershell_xml]: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/scripting/powertip-use-powershell-to-edit-xml-file/
[ms_docs_dotnet_api_core3]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/?view=netcore-3.0 
[ms_docs_system_xml_api]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.xml?view=netcore-3.0

In any event, the short version of the powershell, cutting out the mistakes,
and without breaking confidentiality, was such:

```powershell
[xml]$xml_file = get-content("$provided_file")
$xml_file.$parent_property.$child_propery.$grandchild_property.$attribute=$new_value
$xml_file.save("$path/new_file_copy_with_changes")
```

What I realized afterward, because the attribute was itself a string, however deeply buried in the nodes, I could have done:

```powershell
$xml.SelectSingleNode($xpath).'#text' = ($xml.SelectSingleNode($xpath).'#text').replace("$find", "$replace")
```

...where ``$xpath`` is a string formatted in hierarchical structure by a
[standard][ms_xpath_examples]
which allows for straightforward navigation of XML structured documents.

[ms_xpath_examples]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/dotnet/netframework-4.0/ms256086(v=vs.100)

Though that's as far as I care to dig into the subject.
