---
---

## Screening interview after-action review

I had a video interview today which asked I demonstrate some powershell
knowledge. Powershell is by far not my favorite shell, nor my favorite
language. It's not my daily driver.

Ultimately, they seemed to have a positive takeaway from it. These were
positive points for them:

- Willing to demonstrate live and talk through what I was doing
- Able to work out my own problems and come up with a solution from scratch
  without copypasting from the internet
- Even though I was unfamiliar with the environment and the language,
  particularly how to get powershell to behave the way I thought it should, I
  was able to work through the problem.

The target as described was to write a function which output the sum of the
number of consecutive '1's in an array. I ended up coming up with this. It's
not pretty, and it's limited in functionality, but it works for the assigned
purpose, and that's sufficient for me.


```powershell
Function get-max_consecutive_ones {
	param($int_array);

	$largest_yet_found = 0;
	$current_streak = 0;
	write-host("Largest streak should be 0, it is: $largest_yet_found")
		write-host("current streak should be 0, it is: $current_streak")
		foreach ($num in $int_array){
			if($num -eq 1){
				$current_streak++;
				write-host("current streak is: $current_streak");

				if($current_streak -gt $largest_yet_found){
					$largest_yet_found = $current_streak;
					write-host("largest_yet_found: $largest_yet_found");
				}
			}
			else{
				$current_streak = 0;
			}
		}

	write-host("largest streak of ones found is: $largest_yet_found");
	return $largest_yet_found;
};

get-max_consecutive_ones $input_array;
```

The major problems I had were:

- logic errors. I was moving too fast and initially my output was wrong, for a
  couple reasons. I wasn't really engaging my brain, and the first time I had
  the output value, ``$largest_yet_found``, unconditionally assigned the value
  of ``$current_streak``. Then when I remembered that I should set it only if
  it was greater-than, etc, I had it in the wrong scope, so I moved it. 
- Unfamiliarity with the language assumptions. ``Write-Line`` did not work as I
  had hoped. I corrected to a typo'd ``write-ouput``, and then corrected again
  to ``write-host``, all on camera. I just don't know powershell very well.
- Unfamiliarity with the *shell* environment. The code above is written in a
  file, and I should have been able to import it into a running powershell
  environment. I felt an absolute fool when I couldn't figure out why the
  function wasn't available. That's because I was just executing the file,
  expecting that function definition to export to the shell, and it wasn't.
  What I should have been doing is using ``Import-Module`` to import the file
  and its function definitions. I could also have used ``.
  ./max_consecutive_ones.ps1`` to achieve the same, but the internet says to
  prefer ``import-module`` because you can later ``remove-module`` if you wish.

I don't have a good excuse for not sourcing the file correctly. The same is
true of bash, or any language, really. You have to import to get the functions,
not just run the file. I had just left my brain at home I guess.
